'SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF' 'SETTING DESIGN'

Three levels of suspension of disbelief

Coleridge - talor
Romantic movement

made use of folklore and supernatural elements

Lv1: Willingly accepting the unbelievable elements in the story
Lv2: Secondary belief - JRR Tolkien. entirely separate world.

Inside it, what the author relates is true, it accordswith the laws of the world. You therefore believe it...

Internal consistency is key.

Certained limited things of the premise of the setting

Narrative tension. A running joke... carefully managed.

Conworld.

Lv3: Immersion.

Extension of Lv 1, Lv 2, due to participance it becomes that much more important. 

Sense of constant scrutiny is communicated via various ways.

Act in a way that enhances the believe in the setting. A willing participant in the story telling process.

Religious pilgrimage. Flavour and setting detail, as well as backstory details which will come into play later.

Deepen my immersion in the game. Rewarded by the depth and quality in the setting. The setting and the story.

Cultural stagnation. Xenophobic, mired in tradition, a collected fall from grace, the story of a lie in the present dominated in the past.

Hard work and creativity that goes into the game world. 

Several different architectural styles. Books you can read.

Verisimilitude. Believable.

Believable, interesting, stands upto scrutiny, and rewards scrutiny. 

Well made. Fun to play. Memorable moments. 

Generic. Medieval. European. Middle = Normal???

Pocket Guide to the Empire. Excerpts. 

Real life is never normal. Tense. Anarchronism. Generic = no expanded, explained, or scrutinised. The absense of these has problems. 

Cultural, religions conflict. Haves or have nots. Political struggle, economic struggle? Injustice? The things that make a setting interesting and memorable.

That is to say, that they're not there at all. They're not there enough!

A "return to form".

City built on a shameful secret, being torn about by ancient grudges. 

Culture. History. Progress. Special quality. 


For more information, see: 
