'SKILL TRICKS'

Skill tricks are an exciting new way of customizing your scoundrel, allowing her to perform such cinematic effects as swinging across a chasm hanging from a whip, leaping off a warhorse while swinging a sword, jumping and running up a wall, and other similar actions popular in movies but until now unsupported in the D&D rules . Because they require the expenditure of skill points, skill tricks appeal most strongly to members of those character classes that focus on skills.

The four types of skill tricks are interaction, manipu- lation, mental, and movement. Each type focuses on a different subset of skills . While any character can learn tricks of any type, members of certain classes favor par- ticular types of tricks (whether due to the class’s skill list, the character’s areas of expertise, or both).

Interaction: These skill tricks influence social interac- tion between PCs and NPCs . They typically rely on skills used in those situations, such as Bluff, Diplomacy, and Sense Motive . Bards are the most common masters of these skill tricks, but anyone who relies on social interaction to achieve their goals—from bold paladins to boisterous sorcerers—can benefit from them.

Manipulation: A manipulation skill trick depends on the character’s manual dexterity to perform some act of legerdemain . Such tricks use skills that employ similar talents, including Disable Device, Open Lock, and Sleight of Hand . Rogues and ninjas often boast a few manipulation tricks in their repertoire.

Mental: These tricks pit the mind and senses of the character against an opponent . Mental tricks focus on skills such as Concentration, Knowledge, and Spot . Since this category includes a wide range of skills, many different characters dabble in such tricks.

Movement: As the name suggests, movement tricks typically involve the character physically moving from one location to another . They use skills that come into play during movement, such as Balance, Jump, Move Silently, and Tumble . Monks, barbarians, and scouts are most likely to learn such tricks, but anyone looking for an edge on the battlefield has something to gain from them.

Learning Skill Tricks

Learning a skill trick costs 2 skill points . Whenever you acquire skill points, you can choose to spend skill points to acquire a skill trick instead of purchasing ranks in skills.

You can learn any skill trick, as long as you meet the prerequisite and can afford to expend 2 skill points. If you later no longer meet the prerequisite for a skill trick, you can’t use it again until you once more qualify.

You can’t learn more than one skill trick at any given level, and your total skill tricks cannot exceed one-half your character level (rounded up) . Certain feats and prestige class features allow a character to exceed these limits . If you use the retraining rules in Player’s Handbook II, you can choose to unlearn any one skill trick when you attain a new level, assigning the reclaimed skill points as you wish (either to buy skill ranks or to learn a different skill trick).

You can learn a skill trick only once; you either know it or you don’t.

Using Skill Tricks

Skill tricks are special maneuvers, so you can’t just use them as often as you want . Unless otherwise noted, a skill trick can be performed only once per encounter (or once per minute, for scenes that don’t involve combat or other conflict) . This restriction sets skill tricks apart from feats and class features, which are often repeatable .

Typically, performing a skill trick is either part of another action or an action in itself . Each skill trick’s description specifies what sort of action, if any, is required .

A skill trick usually either requires a successful skill check to pull off, or it “piggybacks” on a skill check you’re already making . For example, the Extreme Leap trick functions only if you’ve already succeeded on a DC 20 Jump check (or DC 10 with a running start) to make a horizontal jump; it doesn’t require a separate Jump check . Exceptions to this general rule are noted in the skill trick descriptions .

Using a skill trick does not provoke attacks of opportu- nity unless its description specifically states that it does (or it involves an action that would normally provoke attacks of opportunity, such as moving out of a threatened square) .

For more information, see SKILL TRICK DESCRIPTIONS. 