Spell Books

Although most folks think of them as thick, heavy tomes of parchment or vellum pages bound with ornate covers and heavy locks, a wizard’s spellbooks can take almost any form. A spellbook can be made from belts of linked metal plates that serve as pages, scribed on thin sheets of ivory, or disguised by magic to look like a shield, gaming board, lute, or almost any other mundane item of equivalent size.

Whatever their appearance, spellbooks are generally classi- fied in two groups—arcanabula and grimoires. Arcanabula, or workbooks, are a wizard’s everyday working tomes. They tend to contain spells jumbled in any order, interspersed with annotations and notes of magical lore, and are often stained and battered from travel and use in the field.

Grimoires, sometimes called greatbooks, are formal, ordered collections of spells. Greatbooks tend to be locked, guarded, and hidden, either in a secure cache or in a wizard’s abode. Most are composed with gilded ornamentation or inks, and they might even have plates of polished ivory or platinum within them, engraved or stamped with arcane writings. They are usually large and often of unusual proportions (such as very tall for their width), and many have metal-bound corners (ornate protective caps) and chased or relief-carved covers.

Using Spell Books

Every wizard possesses a personal set of notations, formulas, scripts, and ciphers for recording the workings of a spell. While the underlying language and concepts are the same, no wizard can simply pick up another’s spellbook and instantly prepare spells from the foreign tome. Whenever an attempt is made to understand another wizard’s spellbook (including forgotten tomes discovered in ruined towers or traveling workbooks seized from the hoards of enemies), the reader must employ read magic or succeed on a Spellcraft check (DC 20 + spell level) to identify a particular spell (and its general purpose, if the spell is one not known to the reader). Until a wizard deciphers a spell in a foreign book, its magic is useless.

Wizards can prepare spells from a foreign spellbook or copy spells from a foreign spellbook into their own as described in Arcane Magical Writings, page 178 of the Player’s Hand- book. Two special circumstances, discussed below, are worth noting.

Masters and Apprentices: Wizards who take on apprentices usually teach them many of the same notations and codes they themselves have perfected. A wizard attempting to decipher, prepare, or copy a spell from the spellbook of a master (or apprentice) gains a +2 circumstance bonus on the Spellcraft check.

Mastering a Foreign Spellbook: Instead of laboriously copying each spell of interest from a found spellbook into his own, a wizard might instead make a dedicated effort to master the spellbook’s particular ciphers and notations. This procedure is sometimes referred to as becoming attuned to the spellbook (although it’s a matter of time and study, not a mystical process). Mastering a spellbook requires a success- ful Spellcraft check (DC 25 + the level of the highest-level spell in the book) and takes one week plus one day per spell contained within. If the wizard succeeds, he can use the foreign spellbook as his own, requiring no further Spellcraft checks to prepare or copy spells from it. If he fails, he cannot attempt to master that spellbook again until he gains at least 1 more rank in Spellcraft.

Spell Book Construction

Aside from ornamentation and spurious false writings, all spellbooks require one page per spell level (minimum one page) to record any particular spell. The pages of most spellbooks have been treated for durability and protection against fire, mold, water, parasites, staining, and other hazards. These procedures make even a blank spellbook relatively expensive.

The base cost of 15 gp buys a well-bound leather volume of 100 parchment pages, a style also typically used for other high-quality books such as the genealogies of noble families or the master copies of sages’ published writings. Exotic materials increase the cost and weight of a spellbook accordingly, and these materials are usually reserved for grimoires, not arcanabula.

Table 5–1: Spellbooks
Covers 			Weight (lb) 		Hardness		HP	Cost (gp)
Leather 		1 			2 			+0 	5
Wood, thin 		1 			3 			+1 	20
Metal, soft 		5 			5 			+4 	100
Metal, hard 		5  			7 			+5 	200
Dragonhide 		2 			4 			+2 	200
Slipcase		+1 			+1  			+1 	+20

Pages (100) 		Weight (lb)		Hardness 		HP	Cost (gp)
Parchment  		2 			+0 			1 	10
Paper, linen 		2 			+0 			2 	20 
Vellum 			2 			+0 			3 	50
Bone or ivory  		4 			+0 			4 	100
Metal foil		20  		+1 			8 	500

The weight, hardness, hit points, and cost of a spellbook of unusual construction is the sum of its cover and page con- struction. For example, a book made with a steel plate cover (hard metal) and copper foil pages weighs 25 pounds, has hardness 8, 13 hit points, and costs 700 gold pieces.

All fine books can be purchased with a waterproof double slipcase of chased and tooled leather, strong enough to pro- tect against driving rain or burial in snow but not against prolonged immersion. Special physical treatments (such as baths in secret herbal tinctures and alchemical solutions designed to retard fire and mold damage) are included in the above costs.

Protecting Spellbooks

Any wizard with the means to do so will carefully safeguard her spellbooks against accident, battle damage, or theft. Most arcanabula feature cheap and inexpensive protections (often a simple explosive runes or fire trap), but for most wizards, the risk of losing a workbook isn’t enough to justify the expense of high-level protection.

Grimoires, on the other hand, are generally stored in the most secret hiding places (sometimes even on other planes) and equipped with mechanical traps, loyal guardians, and deadly spells of defense. 

The protections applied to a great- book can take virtually any form, from magically sustained poisonous spiders or snakes, to bladders of paralyzing or sleep-inducing gases, to scything blades or poisoned needles concealed in the locks, lids, or frames of the coffers and cabinets the books are hidden in. These traps are never of a design or nature that might endanger the book, but otherwise are almost limitless in the kinds of damage they can inflict on the uninvited.

Magical protections can add thousands of gold pieces to the cost of even the simplest tome.
￼￼￼￼￼￼