'ALTERNATIVE SPELL BOOKS'

Arcane Geometry

A small number of wizards study the magic inherent in precisely scribed designs and perfect angles, abandoning the standard arcane symbology of words and equations. The spellbook of a geometer (see page 40), its pages filled with painstakingly precise diagrams of circles, arcs and angles, looks nothing like the spellbook of another wizard. While a standard spellbook requires a number of pages scribed with phrases and formulae to record a single spell of 2nd level or higher, a geometer can record any spell of any level on only a single page of his book.

Learning to record and prepare spells through arcane geometry is almost as difficult as learning to prepare wizard spells in the first place, so to use this new symbology for his spellbooks, a wizard must take levels in the geometer prestige class.

Structures

More impressive than even the most extravagant grimoire, permanent structures (circles of standing stones, pyramids, labyrinths, towers, and the like) can be used to record the workings of arcane spells. At the simplest level, walls can be graven or painted with spell scripts (essentially serving as an oversized spellbook of plaster and stone), while in other cases, a structure’s very form and arrangement can serve to record arcane information. A ring of standing stones each carved with a single glyph, for instance, could provide an arcanist with the information necessary to determine how the spell is to be cast from their physical orientation.

Aside from the advantage of its permanence and strength, a structure can record spells that can then be prepared or learned by any number of spellcasters for as long the structure stands. At the same time, that openness means that anyone who visits the site (friend or foe) might be able to comprehend and ultimately use the spell scribed there.

Preparing a spell from a structure works like preparing a spell from a borrowed spellbook (see page 178 of the Player’s Handbook). A spellcaster must first decipher the arcane markings with a read magic spell or a Spellcraft check (DC 20 + spell level), then succeed on a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + spell level) to prepare the spell. An arcanist can also scribe a structure spell into her spellbook (as if transcribing from another caster’s spellbook) if she so desires.

Wall Spells: Carving or painting an arcane formula on a structure’s walls works much like scribing a spell into a spellbook on a larger scale. It takes 100 square feet of wall space to serve as one page of a spellbook (so that a 9th-level spell requires 900 square feet, or an area 30 feet on a side), and with the increased size, an arcanist must use up a greater volume of special materials to record the spell (a cost of 300 gp per spell level).

Recording a spell on a wall requires a 24 hours plus an additional 12 hours per 100 square feet of space used, and the spellcaster scribing the wall must succeed on a DC 15 Craft (painting) check. Carving or chiseling a spell into a wooden or stone wall requires a 24 hours plus an additional 48 hours per 100 square feet of space used, and requires the spellcaster to succeed on a DC 20 Craft (woodworking) or Craft (stoneworking) check.

It’s possible for a wizard to map out the precise symbols to be painted, cut, or carved without doing the final work. Preparing the surface by sketching or penciling the design in such a way that workers unfamiliar with the spell can then paint or carve its symbols requires a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + spell level) and takes 24 hours plus an additional 1 hour per 100 square feet, after which other workers can make Craft checks in the wizard’s place and complete the process as described above.

Structure Spells: Designing an entire building or edifice to preserve arcane knowledge is a challenging proposition, and a structure so designed must generally have an area of at least two 10-foot cubes per spell level to be recorded—pas- sages cut to precise measurements, mosaic paths picked out on a flagstone floor, freestanding monoliths, walls, arches, buttresses, or almost any other type of feature whose design and orientation might convey information. Special materials must be used in the structure’s preparation, costing at least 1,000 gp per 10-foot cube of area over and above the cost of construction. For those who wish it, a comprehensive breakdown of designing and building in a D&D campaign can be found in Stronghold Builder’s Guidebook.

The structure must be designed by a wizard who knows the spell to be recorded. The wizard must make a successful Knowledge (architecture and engineering) check (DC 20 + the level of the spell to be recorded), then personally oversee construction for at least 4 hours per day. Construction is halted temporarily if the wizard can’t oversee the job for any reason, and though there’s no limit to how long it might take to complete construction, hired workers generally need to be paid their full daily wage while awaiting the wizard’s return.

Structures designed to record arcane spells are usually much less obvious than walls painted with arcane symbols, and special instruction is generally required for wizards who seek to prepare them. A wizard without this special instruction takes a –5 penalty on Spellcraft checks made to decipher, prepare, or copy structure spells.

Tattoos

By the use of tattoos, some wizards turn their own bodies into spellbooks, and high-level tattooed mages can often be covered with arcane designs and symbols from head to toe. Some spell tattoos can be placed so that the caster can read them simply by looking down, while others need the aid of mirrors or even a familiar to study their tattoos.
Tattooing offers a means of creating a spellbook that’s virtually impossible to lose.

It does have the disadvantage of the limited amount of usable spell-recording space on the average humanoid-shaped body, as well as the possibility of having to partially or com- pletely undress to reference every spell in one’s repertoire. Tattooing also usually provides unmis- takable evidence of a character’s arcane nature, denying the opportunity for anonymity that many arcanists crave.
For creatures with humanoid forms, different areas of the body can hold varying page-equivalents of spellbook information, depending on their size.

Body Area  		Spell book equivalent
Hand 			1 page each
Forearm 		3 pages each
Upper Arm 		3 pages each
Chest 			6 pages
Abdomen 		6 pages
Upper Leg 		5 pages
Lower Leg 		5 pages
Foot 			1 page each
Face* 			2 pages 			
Scalp* 			4 pages
Back,upper* 	10 pages
Back,lower* 	4 pages
Leg,posterior* 	4 pages
Arm,posterior* 	2 pages

* A wizard cannot read spells in these locations without the use of a mirror, scrying magic, or a familiar’s assistance.

Because tattoos must save on space to fit in a comparative- ly small area, they must be scribed with great care and the finest reagents and inks, requiring 200 gp per page-equiva- lent, a time of 24 hours plus an additional 8 hours per spell level, and a Craft (tattooing) check (DC 20 + spell level if the caster scribes the tattoo himself; DC 10 + spell level if someone else does the work). To have the work done by another tattoo artist, the wizard must make a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + spell level) to prepare a carefully executed sketch or diagram of the tattoo to be scribed. Tattoos that can’t be read by a wizard without assistance (those placed on areas of his body he can’t always see) must be scribed by someone else.

Wizards who employ other forms of tattoo magic (such as those found in the FORGOTTEN REALMS campaign setting) can employ spellbook tattoos as well, but they must keep careful track of how much body space is allocated to each tattoo type.