'LEGENDARY SITE FORMAT'

The legendary sites are described in the following format.

Name of legendary site

Lore: This portion of the description provides any information available to characters about the location, along with the relevant Knowledge check DCs necessary to acquire it . Bardic knowledge checks can be substituted for any of these checks at the same DCs.

Description: This entry offers a physical description of a typical example of such a location and includes more details about the place (including sounds, smells, and tactile sensations) and details of how its effect or special ability looks once activated.

Prerequisite: Any prerequisite needed to gain the legendary site’s special ability is detailed here . In addition to meeting this prerequisite, a character must visit the location physically to have any chance of acquiring the special ability it confers.

Location Activation: These paragraphs describe the rules for acquiring and using the special ability that the location bestows . Any command words or activities needed to activate the location’s power are also noted here.

Recharge: Some legendary sites confer their benefits only at intervals; this section details the time that must pass before the site’s power can be used again . Legendary sites such as those described here often confer their benefits repeatedly, though certain conditions might apply as described in this entry.

Special Ability: This entry describes the special ability conferred and gives the rules for using it . Unless otherwise specified, no creature can gain the benefit of a legendary site’s conferred power more than once.

Duration: This section gives the ability’s duration or number of uses.

Aura: This line describes the type of magical aura, if any, that surrounds the location . (Legendary sites, including those described here, typically have no magical auras .)

Variation: Since legendary sites can arise in multiple places, this entry (if present) suggests similar situations or areas for placing the location.

Ability Value: This entry provides the gp value of the conferred ability . Although these abilities can never be bought or sold, they can be substituted for treasure of like value and count toward the benefiting character’s overall wealth.