'ALTERNATIVE PREPS'

Alternative magic item forms are a good way to add flavor and mystery to your campaign. If one culture is known to craft magic tiles instead of potions, foes from that culture will be distinct from other opponents. After the first instance in which player characters encounter NPCs who use tiles to obtain combat benefits, they will come to recognize such items as the tools of a particular nation or foe. (“Look, that assassin was carrying Abkathian potion-tiles. The Abkathians must be behind this!”) Be careful not to overdo this sort of variant material, though—the classic forms are classic for a reason, and if your players end up with no idea what forms magic items in your campaign might take, they could spend more time worrying about that than they do enjoying the game.

Potion Alternatives

Magic Fruit: Apples and pomegranates with magical properties are commonplace in mythology. A potion-fruit might consist of a slice or section of a fruit steeped inamagicallibationthat producesitseffectwhen consumed.

Magic Tiles: A smallceramictile inscribed with a magic rune could hold a potion-type ef- fect. When it is snapped or broken in one’s hand, the effect is re- leased.

Skull Talismans: The skull of a small animal (a bird, mouse, or rat, for example) is enchanted with a single spell. When crushed in one's hand or underfoot, the skull talisman releases its stored effect.

Spell Wafers: A thin wafer of specially prepared bread or dough, stamped with a holy or arcane symbol, can hold a spell as well as a potion bottle can. When the wafer is consumed, the stored magic takes effect.

Scroll Alternatives

Gemstone:Acomplex series of gestures and sounds is completed with a specially prepared gemstone in hand, and the spell stored within it is released when the final words are spoken. Like the parchment on which a scroll is scribed, a gemstone is emptied by cast- ing but can be reused again.

Incendiary: A spell is stored in a special mix of powders and glyph-covered paper. To use an incendiary, a spellcaster speaksthelast words of the spell while si- multaneously igniting the prepared device (usually by means of a minor magical property of the incendiary form that requires no additional action to activate). The incendiary is consumed in a brilliant col- ored flash or haze of strangely coiling smoke, completing the spell.

Macrame: A spell is held in a small, complex weave of precisely tied knots. The user pulls apart the knotted square by choosing the right strands while speaking the spell’s activation words.

When a scroll is found in the course of a campaign, deciphering its magical text is usually the first step to using it, but since variant scroll forms that don’t have spells stored in written form can’t be deciphered with read magic, they must be identified with a successful Spellcraft check (DC 20 + spell level).