'ARCANE CAMPAIGN' 'CASTERS IN SOCIETY'

In most human cities and towns, the general populace is notoriously insensitive to the distinctions of training, skill, and talent that separate arcane spellcasters. The dif- ferences between a sorcerer and an enchanter, a warlock and a necromancer, or an evoker and a warmage are lost on such people, and any arcane spellcaster (other than the bard, who is generally easy to identify) is equally likely to be called mage, arcanist, sorcerer, enchanter, or wizard by someone without any real understanding of the character’s true skills. To most people, distinctions between types of arcane spellcaster matter only to arcanists themselves. Even in the most magical of settings, though, arcane spellcasters maintain a high social profile. Few people in a busy trade town will mark the arrival or departure of a weathered sellsword or rakish fop, but the arrival of an arcanist of any description will be carefully noted and observed.

Bards

Unless it’s by her own intent, a bard is never mistaken for another type of arcane spellcaster, and although the common folk might fear the sudden appearance of an unknown mage, the arrival of a new bard in town is often a cause for celebration. A bard’s skills promise new songs, new stories, and new music so powerful and magical that listeners can forget for a short time the cares and troubles of their lives. When a bard of great skill sings her songs in the common room of the village inn, her listeners enjoy for a short time entertainment fit for a king—an hour or two of dreams and splendor in which even the lowest laborer can indulge.

Of course, some bards also have reputations as thieves and liars, being all too quick to flee town leaving behind a string of false promises and broken hearts. Though the motives of such characters will always be questioned, people know that even the most blackhearted bard lacks the power to unleash magical plagues or other arcane devastation. Though people often fear magical power, they know that the bard’s brand of magic carries significantly fewer risks to them than those of other arcanists.

Bards move easily in circles of nobility and power, and even a bard of modest skill can show up at the door of the king’s hall and expect to trade a few songs for a seat at the banquet table and a bed for the night. In some cultures, nobles retain bards as advisors, entertainers, spymasters, and tutors to their children; these house bards, or hallsingers, often become permanent members of a noble’s household. In exchange for room, board, and a monthly retainer, a house bard serves as a trusted lieutenant, working assiduously to advance the noble’s interests and guard the family to whom she has given her loyalty. Just as a noble wins renown for the quality of the bard in his household, bards win renown for the elevation of their patrons, and to be the court bard of a high king is a great honor indeed.

Bards with noble patrons can still spend much of their time adventuring, but they are expected to devote at least some of their efforts to advancing their patron’s causes and to report back at regular intervals what they have heard and observed during their travels. In general, a bard with a patron must spend at least one week per month at the noble’s residence, but after every few years of service, a bard is expected to forego travel for a time, spending several consecutive months in attendance at her lord’s court.

In addition to room and board, a house bard can expect a stipend of about 10 gp per month per character level (replacing the money an itinerant bard might earn through use of her Perform skill). On special occasions, such as when entertaining a visiting noble, a character’s performance might be expected to earn her more.

For further information, check 'ARCANE PERSONALITIES'



