'ADVENTURING DAY'

On the 15 minute adventuring day.

Simply put: it shouldnt happen. If it does, it favours the GM, not the players. 

All one needs is to spend some time reflecting on what is in the first two or three chapters of the D&D3.5E DMG as well as the Monster Manual. Specifically:

Monsters use preps. 

Preps being: Potions, wands, scrolls, etc...

Important monsters have class levels. Some classes are very good at pitched-battles - such as the Cleric. 

NPCs have between 10-50% of their gear being preps. 50% being the maximum before it gets unfair. Though it recommends a lower figure. 

Monsters can freely use their best spells - they're in a life or death situation, they will do their best to live, given their abilities.

In short, going "super nova" does not favour the players.

The DMG states: the NPCs live by the same rules as the players. They live and die based on their decisions and fortunes. And will use the game world to their advantage to survive.

The CR system compared to the ECL system means that the GM is better able at taking advantage of the game system than the players are.

The Complete Arcane even states that NPCs such as Ogres may get killed by invisibility early, but they will learn to adapt to solve such problems. Considering that Ogres have -4 INT, this implies that most people run low intelligence wrong.

It must be also stated that NPC monsters are not mindless mooks to slaughter. They have personalities (according to the DMG). They are the top 20% of the population. 

Give them names. Backgrounds. Make them interesting. Make them something notable. Give them descriptions. Its this attention to detail that gives players a reason to use Comprehend Languages.

So anyway, for Goblins and Hobgoblins in bands, there is one level three npc per 20.

For Orcs this is higher! For a band of 11-20 Orcs, there is two level three characters and a level three to six leader.

Lets look at Kobolds:

"band (10-100 plus 100% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 20 adults and 1 leader of 4th-6th level)"

Notice that it says "leader" and "sergeant". It does not say what race they are. That is upto the GM, of which there are NPC rules to generate such things randomly if so desired.

Not related, but also interesting: 100% noncombatants.

For further information, see 'PREPS', 'OGRE DRUID'

